Add requirement to use X-Ray propagation for aws-sdk client calls (#3212)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/trace/semantic_conventions/instrumentation/aws-sdk.md

Reviewer: I think the frequent cross-referencing indicates that this split between semantic conventions and esp. the "instrumentation" subpart is very artificial and IMHO should be reconsidered.

As a less fundamental change, I think `specification/*/semantic_conventions/instrumentation`  actually belongs under `supplementary-guidelines/compatibility` (since an instrumentation is always about establishing compatibility of an existing library with OTel -- I feel like "compatibility" in general is a rather redundant term in this context)

Reviewer: > I'm not sure the cross-referencing is needed at all.

Think from a practical perspective: As an instrumentation writer, how should I find all these guidelines + conventions? With the current split, the cross-referencing is IMHO absolutely vital.

Author: I also think the cross-referencing is important. I'd rather leave it for now.

Some descriptions are also provided for populating general OpenTelemetry semantic conventions based on these APIs.

## Context Propagation

> When making outgoing calls using an aws-sdk, AWS X-Ray's propagation format MUST be used to add context propagation

Author: @Oberon00 I assume you mean you are adding propagation to the sqs/sns message attributes?  I think it's important to always send the x-ray headers on the request, but I can add the following:
> Additional propagation formats MAY be applied to individual request types that support arbitrary attributes such as `SqsMessage`. This can allow for transporting additional context that may not be supported by x-ray, such as baggage. Documentation SHOULD advise that doing so is subject to attribute limits and billing impacts.

Under what circumstance do you think it should be disabled?

> When making outgoing calls using an aws-sdk, AWS X-Ray's propagation format MUST be used to add context propagation

Author: I went ahead and added that paragraph.

> When making outgoing calls using an aws-sdk, AWS X-Ray's propagation format MUST be used to add context propagation

Reviewer: I.e. the weakest wording we could add I think is "Instrumentations MAY offer an enabled-by-default option to control enabling/disabling X-Ray propagation"

> When making outgoing calls using an aws-sdk, AWS X-Ray's propagation format MUST be used to add context propagation

Author: Ok, I added your suggested verbiage.

Some descriptions are also provided for populating general OpenTelemetry semantic conventions based on these APIs.

## Context Propagation

> When making outgoing calls using an aws-sdk, AWS X-Ray's propagation format MUST be used to add context propagation to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When making outgoing calls using an aws-sdk, an AWS service-supported propagation format MUST be used to add context propagation to
```

We need flexibility to react to a change in the set of supported propagation formats and thus should not mandate a single format.

> http headers of the outgoing request. Propagation headers MUST be added before the signature is calculated to prevent errors

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
http headers of the outgoing request unless another propagator is explicitly provided. Propagation headers MUST be added before the signature is calculated to prevent errors
```

The user needs to retain control to decide how propagation should happen.  Maybe they're using the AWS SDK with services that mimic AWS service APIs but expect w3c tracecontext propagation.

Author: Not sure I follow.  Could you elaborate on when this would be problematic?

Reviewer 2: [min.io](https://min.io/product/s3-compatibility) provides an S3-compatible service API.  I have no idea whether it supports tracing or what context propagation formats it supports, but there is no reason to expect that they would only ever support exactly the same formats as AWS S3.  Not allowing a user to specify their own propagator will prevent them from using such an AWS-compatible service with anything other than the X-Ray propagator.

Author: min.io seems to handle change events via pushing notifications to a queue or db: https://min.io/docs/minio/kubernetes/upstream/administration/monitoring.html

They don't support x-ray propagation or anything else that I can see.  That said, as long as AWS only supports X-Ray I don't think it makes sense to support other propagation mechanisms. When AWS adds support for something else, the spec can be updated at that point.

Reviewer 2: I don't think it makes sense to prohibit the user from making this choice.  What AWS supports is a different conversation entirely.  The user should be in control of what the system produces.

Reviewer 3: I think it makes sense to allow the user to override the propagator so that when AWS does support W3C they can switch without any other changes necessary. No need to wait on an instrumentation upgrade and potential conflicts there if they want to switch.

> on signed requests. Instrumentations MAY offer an enabled-by-default option to control enabling/disabling X-Ray propagation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
on signed requests.
```

This isn't required if we allow the user to explicitly provide a (potentially no-op) propagator.

X-Ray is necessary because it is the only format currently supported by AWS to allow context propagation through AWS managed

> services, for example SNS -> SQS -> Lambda. Implementations of AWS X-Ray instrumentation for aws-sdk can be used as

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this paragraph adds value and it is bound to become out-of-date and incorrect at some point.

Author: I added it to provide justification on why this is necessary.  Key word here is *currently*.  I understand that much of this is subject to change as AWS evolves their support.  I think that when that assumption changes, the spec can be updated.

Reviewer 2: I don't think there's a need to include this and doing so risks the spec diverging from reality.  It is not normative and thus doesn't belong in normative spec language.

Author: I've reworded it.  Let me know if the updated version is ok.

Reviewer 4: The new paragraph looks better to me. @Aneurysm9, will you release your blocking comments now?

> services, for example SNS -> SQS -> Lambda. Implementations of AWS X-Ray instrumentation for aws-sdk can be used as
> reference for how to instrument the SDK for each language. (For example: [java](https://github.com/aws/aws-xray-sdk-java),
> [node](https://github.com/aws/aws-xray-sdk-node), and [python](https://github.com/aws/aws-xray-sdk-python).)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
services, for example SNS -> SQS -> Lambda.
```

I'm not sure this is relevant or appropriate for inclusion in the spec.

Additional propagation formats MAY be applied to individual request types that support arbitrary attributes such as `SqsMessage`.
This can allow for transporting additional context that may not be supported by x-ray, such as baggage or tracestate.

> Documentation SHOULD advise that doing so is subject to attribute limits and billing impacts.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is necessary if the user is allowed to provide their own propagator and we're only stating that X-Ray is the default rather than the global propagator.

Author: I think this is useful to point out because the carrier here is different compared to what is discussed above.

Some descriptions are also provided for populating general OpenTelemetry semantic conventions based on these APIs.

## Context Propagation

When making outgoing calls using an aws-sdk, an AWS service-supported propagation format MUST be used to add

> context propagation to http headers on the outgoing request, unless another propagator is explicitly provided.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
context propagation to HTTP headers on the outgoing request, unless another propagator is explicitly provided,
in which case the provided propagator MUST be used.
```

Propagation headers MUST be added before the signature is calculated to prevent errors on signed requests.

The following formats are currently supported by AWS services for propagation:

* [AWS X-Ray](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/xray/latest/devguide/aws-xray.html)

AWS service-supported context propagation is necessary to allow context propagation
through AWS managed services, for example: S3 -> SNS -> SQS -> Lambda.

Additional propagation formats MAY be applied to individual request types that support arbitrary attributes such as `SqsMessage`.

> This can allow for transporting additional context that may not be supported by x-ray, such as baggage or tracestate.

Author: @Oberon00 Is this not sufficient to emphasize the point that other propagation formats may be used on some request types?

Reviewer: I think that is sufficient.

> 
> The following formats are currently supported by AWS services for propagation:
> 
> * [AWS X-Ray](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/xray/latest/devguide/aws-xray.html)
> 
> AWS service-supported context propagation is necessary to allow context propagation
> through AWS managed services, for example: S3 -> SNS -> SQS -> Lambda.
> 
> Additional propagation formats MAY be applied to individual request types that support arbitrary attributes such as `SqsMessage`.
> This can allow for transporting additional context that may not be supported by x-ray, such as baggage or tracestate.
> Documentation SHOULD advise that doing so is subject to attribute limits and billing impacts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I think the first paragraph says all that needs to be said here.  

The X-Ray docs are not normative for other AWS services and the link provided doesn't give details on supported propagation formats.  At best it says this, which tells a user looking for supported propagation formats nothing of value:

> AWS services that are [integrated with X-Ray](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/xray/latest/devguide/xray-services.html) can add tracing headers to incoming requests, send trace data to X-Ray, or run the X-Ray daemon. For example, AWS Lambda can send trace data about requests to your Lambda functions, and run the X-Ray daemon on workers to make it simpler to use the X-Ray SDK.

Saying that AWS service-supported context propagation is necessary for AWS services to propagate context is saying that `1 = 1`.  It provides no value.  Worse, it's misleading since context can be propagated in-band in the message sent through SNS or SQS without any AWS services being aware that it exists and a trace can be constructed just fine by users who don't care what the transport mechanism did.

That additional propagation formats may be used is already covered in the first paragraph.  The rest is guessing at implementation details that don't seem relevant to this specification.  If we're talking about the content sent through AWS services and not messages to AWS services then we're out of the realm of the AWS SDK instrumentation and semantic conventions.

I feel that we should specify as little as is necessary, and no more.

Reviewer 3: I think it is useful to include context around why XRay is used by default, over the global propagator, and the example of `S3->SQS` is the clearest way to give that context. The only way to include trace context in a request that writes to S3 and then creates a messages on an SQS queue is X-Ray headers on the HTTP request to S3, correct? There is no option for in-band. So it isn't misleading and helps to not have the question brought up over and over about why this requirement is in the spec.

Some descriptions are also provided for populating general OpenTelemetry semantic conventions based on these APIs.

## Context Propagation

When making outgoing calls using an aws-sdk, an AWS service-supported propagation format MUST be used to add
context propagation to HTTP headers on the outgoing request, unless another propagator is explicitly provided,
in which case the provided propagator MUST be used.
Propagation headers MUST be added before the signature is calculated to prevent errors on signed requests.

> The following formats are currently supported by AWS services for propagation:
> 
> * [AWS X-Ray](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/xray/latest/devguide/aws-xray.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only the [AWS X-Ray](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/xray/latest/devguide/aws-xray.html) format is currently currently natively supported by AWS services.
```

Author: @Aneurysm9 which do you prefer?

Reviewer: To add another alternative to the set:

```suggestion
The following formats are currently natively supported by AWS services for propagation:

* [AWS X-Ray](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/xray/latest/devguide/aws-xray.html)
```

(Current wording is also acceptable for me, I just think it's a bit confusing)
